From Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hansel minutes, a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number 84. Recorded
live Monday, October 8th, 2007. Support for
Hanselman. It says provided by
Tellerik RIT controls. The most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is also
provided by dotnet developers journal.
The world's leading dotnet developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott chats with Steven
tout, a Microsoft developer, working
on new ways to make
concurrency programming easier with.net. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes, and we're sitting
here in Microsoft in building
41 with Steven taupe. How's
it going, Steven? It's going
very well. How are you?
Not too bad. What are
you working on? I'm working
on the parallel computing platform
team at Microsoft, and specifically
on the parallel extensions to
the.net framework or PFX. This
is sort of the, the
grander name for a few
different technologies. Some of which
your listeners may have already
heard of one of which
is parallel link or appealing.
One of which is the
task parallel library or TPL.
And there's a third piece.
We haven't really discussed much,
but it's sort of rounding
out this collection of libraries
that enables developers to better
take advantage of parallelism and
concurrency in their applications. Wow.
That was almost like a
practice marketing speech. That was
brilliant. It wasn't, but I
will have to write it
down afterwards. I'll give you
the transcript because that was
really deep. Thanks. So this
is, I'm going to ask
ignorant questions because this is
a big topic and I
want to end the topic
by asking you during questions.
I want to kind of
get my brain around exactly
what's going on here. So
system dot threading, I know
that's a silly thing to
go and say, you know,
you're talking about parallel extensions
and concurrency and multi-pronged multicore
and I just said, Hey,
what about system dot thread?
It's actually a fabulous question.
In fact, we're trying to
think through right now, how
to actually describe the relationship
with system dot threading and
whether we're actually part of
system not threatening or not.
They're at, at a core
level system that threading is
all about low level manipulation
of, of work. So there's
a set of synchronization, primitives
and systems threading. That includes
for example, system dot threading
dot monitor system dot threading
dot reader, Ryder lock system
dot threading that Rita rider
lock slim, and then a
bunch of basically.net wrappers around
when 32 executor objects like
mutexes and Semafore and, and
the like event manual reset
event, auto reset event and
whatnot. These are all relatively
low level primitives that developers
have a hard time working
with and rationalizing and building
higher level constructs around. And
we don't want people to
force people to spend all
their time kind of in
the depths of the bowels
of, of these programs. When
what they really want to
do is say, you know,
to express what they want
done, not specifically how they
want it done in the
bits and the bytes. And
so what we're trying to
do is create, provide those
higher level constructs. For example,
you've got a system that
threading dot thread pool, which
allows you to say ThreadPool
duck, here's a work item
and a few other kind
of really advanced level scenarios,
but some of the simplest
things that people try and
do with a thread pool,
they have to write a
lot of code to do.
For example, if you say
ThreadPool duck user work item,
and then you want to
wait on the thing that
you cued, that that's very
difficult. You have to actually
modify the delegate that you've
asked to use or work
item. And then you have
to, in that delegate, you
have to set some sort
of event and outside you
have to wait on that
event to complete, but it's
a really common pattern, but
it's a really common pattern.
Similarly, we get a lot
of requests from people to
want to cancel work item,
work items that they've queued
that may not have run
yet. And so one of
the things that we're providing
in this new task power
library is the ability to
get back a, a reference
to that thing that you
queued up and then be
able to manipulate it in
some way. So you can
say tasks dot wait, or
task dot cancel, and so
forth. So we're, we're trying
to take these abstractions to
kind of the next level
and whether we're in system
dot threading, or in system
dot concurrency or whatever namespace
we happen to be in
our goal is that we're
trying to take this beyond
just threads. And we're trying
to say, you're writing a
parallel application. You're writing an
application that takes advantage of
concurrency, not you're writing an
application that manipulates threads and
waits on events and that's
sort, Okay. So let me
try to put this into
something concrete and I'll use
an example from my own
life. I was making a
WinForms application that was going
to talk to a blood
sugar meter, a glucose meter
for diabetics. It's going to
talk to that. And it
was gonna be a very
long running thing, could have
taken a couple of minutes
and I needed to have
the progress bar update. I
wanted also not just the
progress bar up getting, but
I want it to be
informed when certain points certain
milestones have been reached within
this kind of import process.
And I found that entire
experience to be incredibly frustrating,
very difficult to do today.
Cause I wasn't clear if
there was going to be
just the main thread for
the wind forum and then
another thread for the getting
of the data or whether
that be three or four
threads, maybe one for the
serial work. One for the
more logical wrapper around talking
to the actual serial port.
And I kind of got
myself into quite a situation
where basically I ended up
just making the progress bar,
just go and spin, spin,
spin, spin, spin, cause doing
this. What I thought was
a very simple thing, which
was, let me know how
things are going. Basically it
became a fire and forget
operation. And then when I
eventually did come back and
get information, I had to
go and say this dot
invoke required and make sure
whether my button was being
called and inappropriate threat or
my progress bar is being
accessed and appropriately. Are those
the kinds of scenarios that
people are bumping into that
you're going to try. That's
one set of scenarios that
people are bumping into that,
that we're going to try
and fix that This is
a much broader initiative. We're
talking about fixing a much
bigger problem We are. And
so that's sort of the,
the responsiveness keeping your gooey
thread from being blocked, basically
by background work, that's happening,
keeping your application responsive. That's
sort of one big bucket.
Another big bucket we're trying
to solve is taking advantage
of all of the processing
power that that's in your
computer. In your typical desktop
computer today, you've got maybe
one, maybe two processors, or
of course you that fun
Intel commercial, where the guy's
dancing and he splits into
two different people. The advertisement
for the dual core AMD
obviously has dual cores as
well. Next year, quad cores
are going to be common.
A couple of times I
just built a quad core.
Exactly. And it's a relatively
high end today, but in
a year it will be
very affordable. And S you
know, two years after that
eight core and two years
after that 16 core will
be on everyone's desktop Steve's
predictions, right? The new thing
now is 16 core machine
on everyone's desktop. That's the
new mission statement. That's my
mission statement. Okay. But most
applications today are just, aren't
written to take advantage of
that, even if the problem
they're solving could. And it's
basically because people developers aren't
expressing their problems in a
way that allows them to
be paralyzed and not through
no fault of their own.
It's incredibly difficult to do.
And a lot of the
stuff in, in PFX and
the parallel extensions to the.net
framework could be at P
link or TPL are, are
meant to address that particular
problem of how do we
scale, whatever problem you're throwing
at this technology. How do
we scale it to all
of the processors in your
machine? How much of this
is being done with, and
forgive me if I use
the incorrect language, cause I'm
not a concurrency expert, but
how much of this is
being done with a, from
a programmatic perspective, as opposed
to a D a declarative
perspective. I find that what
I'm doing a lot of
concurrency work, I get my
head, my head starts to
ache when I start thinking
about it as a series
of programmatic instructions. But if
I just draw the tree
and say, okay, we branch
part here, you know, fork
off here. And then we
come back together at the
end. That seems like a
very declarative thing. And if
I could just tell the
system that it would figure
out the deal. Yeah. And
in fact, we're sort of
breaking peeling can TPL apart
into kind of describing it
as declarative data parallelism and
a procedural or imperative data
and task parallelism with P
link. You basically get to
say what data you want
and how you want it
process. And you don't even
need to go to the
level of branch or join
here. You say, from this
data they're joined with that
selected this, where that group
by this, and under the
covers, peeling figures out, Oh,
you have 10 processes or
you have 16 processors. Here's
how I'm going to divide
up the work. Here's how
I'm going to partition it.
Here's how I'm going to
process it in parallel. Here's
how I'm going to merge
it and all you, and
all you have to do
to achieve that is to
add.as parallel onto your query.
Nice. So very, very declarative,
very much expressing what you
want done, not how specifically
you want it done. I'm
a really common use case
that I ran into at
my last job where I
worked in financial services was
we wanted to do one
logical operation, like a get
accounts. We're going to go
ask, but it turns out
that those accounts are spread
across 26 different mainframes. So
you might have 26 mainframes
and you say, you've got
three different classes of mainframes,
right? So you've got 10
threads going off to those
guys and 10 off to
these and four, six off
to that. And they're all
different. They need to join
up. But if I don't
care, who's back at 30
seconds, whatever happened at that
point, that's what we've got.
And then we would come
back with an incomplete dataset
because user responsiveness was as
important as getting data. Absolutely.
So we would come back
with records that would say
things like, you know, I'm
unable to contact, you know,
or incomplete or whatever. And
it was an okay experience
because 99% of the time
that would be okay. Is
that a common scenario where
someone wants to do something
in parallel, but at some
point give up absolutely. And
for a variety of reasons,
sometimes you want to do
something in parallel because you
are trying a bunch of
different approaches and any one
of them is good enough.
Sometimes you want to do
things in parallel because you
actually care about all the
responses, but in your scenario,
you don't care enough to
keep the user waiting for
too long. And those are
all scenarios we're trying to
support with, with the technology
Providing. Wow. How do you
model that? I mean, how,
cause you there's this, there's
this bell curve of all
the different things that are
out there. It might be
in the order of dozens
of common scenarios, depending on
which, you know, the tallest
part of the bell curve
that you want to, you
want to hit, how do
you manage the edge cases,
then I'm sure that you'll
nail the 80% solution, but
how do you give the
20% person enough, enough rope
to hang themselves with? They
don't just drop back into
the basic constructs. That's a
wonderful question. The, the chief
way we're doing it is
through different levels of obstruction.
So at the very top
level, we're providing a for
example, a parallel class and
the parallel class just has
a handful of static methods
on it, parallel dot for
parallel dot for each parallel.do
parallel dot whatever. And with
the parallel dot for this
is basically a drop in
replacement for your for-loop. So
instead of saying for I
equals zero while I is
less than an I plus,
plus you have your body,
you say parallel dot four,
zero, and here's my body.
And with anonymous methods and
Lambda expressions, you actually get
to express it by changing.
Literally just that top four
line of your code and
the rest of your body
becomes the delegate that's passed
to this method that handles
it all for you. That
parallel classes under the covers
built on top of, on
top of this lower level
of obstruction, which is basically
a set of classes for
doing this lower level work,
similar to what you would
do with the ThreadPool. So
you can say task dot
create, and you create this
asynchronous body of work. You
get back a reference to
it that you can either
wait on, or you can
cancel, and you can wait
on with varying degrees of
timeouts and, and varying degrees
of controls and knobs. And
you control the number of
threads on which it's running.
You can create isolated pools.
One of the number one
requests that we have for
the thread pool is I
really want to, you know,
I don't want this work
to be part of the
entire application's worth asynchronous work.
I want to create a
pool over here that just
has five threads in it
and keep it separate from
everything else. So we support
that sort of thing. And
so we're really trying to
do it by providing that
parallel class that targets the
80% of the cases and
then the task and the
future classes and the task
manager and everything else that
sort of supports everything else.
And that the, the 80%
case can be built entirely
on top of that's hot.
Yeah. And in fact, peeling
is kind of another top
level of abstraction built on
top of all that stuff.
We're sitting here also with,
with Howard, Durking the editor
in chief of MSDN magazine,
who just gave me a
funny look when I said
that's hot, because this is
the kind of stuff that
we really get off on
here at the Hansel minutes.
Yeah. The Paris Hilton reference
there, that's really hot that
parallelism and concurrency in the.net
framework, you know, because who
else, but, but, but our
listeners and you guys, can
I geek out with this
stuff about, you know, I
don't think my son cares
about this. Let me take
a conversation a little bit
different direction and help me
understand when we say multi-core
machines. If I have a
single process that's running on
a machine with four processors
is their agility. Is there.
If I have multiple threads,
are those threads jumping between?
And I don't quite understand
how the hardware works. I
always used to think it
was one process gets pinned
to a processor Only if
you want it to. And
you'd actually have to express
that either as the user
and for example, in task
manager or as a developer
setting, threat affinity and process
affinity for particular processors. But
by default, no, there is
no affinity. If you have
a process that uses only
one thread by default, that
process will ever only be
wanting running on one processor
at a time, but it
can certainly move around from
processor to processor. Ideally, it
won't be for a lot
of subtle reasons, like making
sure that the caches aren't
invalidated and that the memory
that the well that cashes
aren't invalidated, this could enough.
But if the process has
in it multiple threads, and
let's say in your case,
it has four threads. Those
for each of those four
threads can be running one
on, on each processor at
the same time. And who
decides that for the most
part, it's the operating system
and less as a developer,
you go ahead and say,
this thread here, I really
want it tied to processor
three. In which case you
can set an offending the
mask that says never let
the operating system only allow
this thread to run a
processor three and Prosser force
is available. And there's absolutely
nothing happening on it. Well,
sorry, you can't run through
that thread three until this
threat Intel processor three is
available, But given the goals
of what you've been talking
about with these kind of
parallel extensions to the dominant
framework, I shouldn't have to
worry about that. An application
that uses these extensions on
a single product machine will
just simply run better on
a multiproduct Machine. An application
that uses these extensions on
a single product machine will
run better with ideally with
as many processors as you
can throw at it. Oh,
really? And so the best
applications we see are the
ones that basically scale linearly
in terms of performance, with
the number of processors. Now
that comes with a variety
of caveats, being that, for
example, there's this law called
Amdahl's law that talks about
the relative speed ups you
can expect in your application
based on how much the
application is serial and how
much of it is parallel.
And so if a very
small portion of your application
is parallel, even if we
were to increase by a
hundred X, the speed at
which that parallel section runs,
if it's still dominated by
the cereal portion, you're not
going to overall see a
monster. Speed-ups. However, if that
small portion of your application
is working on data and
over time you expect the
amount of data, your application
is processing to grow exponentially.
Well, then the benefits of
paralyzing that small portion is
going to make a significant
impact or theoretically could, That
brings up in my mind
two different questions. The first
question is I thought someone
said that the optimal number
of threads in any system
is one. Maybe that's the
optimal number of threads in
any processor as well. It
would make sense if it
was the optimal number of
threads per processor. Okay? Assuming
that every thread is doing
the Mac is doing pure
CPU, CPU bound is doing
pure computation. There'd be basically
no benefit. And assuming you
didn't care about a gooey,
that was responsible. One, not
there would be very little
benefit to having more threads
because then they just be,
the, the operating system would
have to context, switch them
in and out of the
various processors at which point,
each concept context, which is
expensive and it's expensive, not
just because of the actual
operations required to save the
thread state from the registers
to memory or discord. Not,
it's also expensive in that
there was some state that
the thread was using in
the cash and the L
one cash and the L
two cash, whatever. And if
the threat is transitioned out
and another threat comes in,
it's going to start writing
over those caches with data
that it cares about. And
then when the original thread
comes back in, it's going
to have to read from
memory rather than cash, right?
All this stuff. And so
context switches are expensive, not
just because of the actual
cost, but because of the
latent effects of it. So
then you suspend certainly that
massive parallelism on a system
that's hardware, we didn't support
massive parallelism would serve very
little purpose. It would. And
one of the things where
we're trying to achieve with
these classes is we try
and make sure that we
scale the work according to
the number of processors you
have. So the parallel dot
for, if you have a
single CPU, we're going to
basically do a C a
four loop. We're not going
to spin up a bunch
of threads. One point, you
know, if you have 16
processors will, in that case,
will nicely share the work
amongst. And are these library
decisions, are these managed code
decisions or are these type
things, these are managed code
decisions. Cool, cool. So then
my second question was, if,
if I'm imagining a kind
of a typical web web
application scenario where a client,
one client hits a website,
and when in the past
that single thread would then
go to an asp.net server,
which would then call to
a database, maybe I started
doing parallelism and then one
person hitting my web server
now ends up being four
connections to my database. And
that becomes a standard thing
because I started being, you
know, very familiar with, with
these technologies. It seems to
me like that would dramatically
change the kind of the
scale signature of the entire
application and would potentially get
me then disk bound quicker.
If I'm ultimately not going
to become CPU bound as
much, I'm going to become
disc bound. But people are
saying already that the machines
are fast. I mean, CPS
are barely working. And then
ultimately we are IO bound.
So what is this kind
of parallelism mean when it
comes to IO intensive operations?
So that's sort of Two
different questions that I'd like
to address the first one,
which is basically what is
this parallelism stuff has to
do with the server and
in general server apps today,
like with asp.net, they already
have enough parallelism to satisfy
the CPU. So if you
take a typical asp.net application,
it's getting thousands of requests
per second, that's sort of
an implicit. Each of those
requests can be treated. It
can be isolated if it's
not accessing shared state or
anything like that, right. It's,
it's, you're already introducing a
thousand different asynchronous pieces of
work. And so unless those,
unless you're expecting very few
requests into your web server
and unless each of those
very few requests is doing
a ton of computational work
using these types in your
using parallel class, for example,
in your server application might
not bother you all that,
all that much, which ties
into your second question, because
like you say, a lot
of stuff is IO bound
in the server world. And
so you take something like
asynchronous pages and asp.net, it's
basically meant to limit the
number of ThreadPool resources you're
consuming and maximize your throughput
while at the same time,
making sure that you're basically
making sure that you're not
blocking other people from requesting
your server resources, just because
you're waiting for the database
to come back or you're
waiting for a web service
call to return or something
like that. And so a
lot of the technologies that
we're working on right now,
we're, we're focusing squarely at
largely desktop or at backend
data processing, not so much
at the web server world,
because for the most part,
your front end web applications
are have enough concurrency to
go around. Interesting. So kind
of I had my brain
in the kind of the
middle part and you're hitting
the, the front bumper and
the back bumper. So, you
know, in the front, we
always look at things like
outlook is a really good
example of a multi-threaded applications,
always stuff going on in
the background and outlook on
the backend. If you were
doing some very computationally intensive
batch processing, if you were
doing protein folding or something
like that, that would be
the time to, to do
that. Absolutely. We used to
do a lot of batch
payment type stuff where we're
trying to spin through, you
know, millions of millions of
bill payments on the backend.
Yep, exactly. That's very interesting.
And all of this would
be done within a single
process. None of this is
parallelism through forking processes in
the kind of, because the
windows process is so much
heavier than a Unix process,
right. You can't just fork
Willy nilly. You could, but
it would be probably a
bad idea. Yeah, yeah. So
this is all, A lot
of stuff we're working on
right now is within a
single process, but the goal
that the resources are managed
across the entire machine. So
that for example, the, the
types that we have, the
underlying, all of this stuff
in PFX, we have this
work stealing scheduler, which basically
means rather than let's say
I was processing some image
I was doing, I had,
I was doing a Ray
tracer, for example, and I
had a, sort of a
straightforward solution of how to
paralyze my Ray tracer processing
because every pixel can be
treated independently. I'm just shooting
a Ray of light, basically
from a particular pixel, seeing
what objects that hits and
comes back with a color.
I could just, if I
had two processors, I could
say one processor is going
to do the top half
of the image and other
process going to do the
bottom half of the image,
or if I had four
processors, I could split the
space into four and it'd
be good to go, but
this is actually going to
take longer than some other
methods. Because for example, in
a typical rate trace image,
the top might be sky,
or it might be all
black. It might be a
color that might, might have
no objects that would be
hit. And that's, there's less
work being spent on each
of those rays at the
top. Then, for example, in
the bottom where there's a
floor, that's reflecting a bunch
of objects and whatnot. And
so what a work steeling
scheduler does is it says,
I, it basically assumes that
different areas of what you're
processing are going to take
more or less time than
other areas. And so it
sort of dynamically manages itself
and is able to steal
work from other processors and
say, Oh, I see you've
got a backlog. Let me
take some of that off
your case. And the same
thing can be, can be
done based on a CPU
utilization and everything going else
going on in the machine.
If other things happening on
the machine are causing a
particular processor to run slower
and thus not to be
able to process work as
fast as some other processor,
those other processors can, can
steal work from that original
thread in this better balance
Workloads across the machine. Very
cool. And that, that, that
now forks says, it's interesting.
We worked a number of
times here. I've split into
two questions there again. The
first one being that, that
got me thinking about work
partitioning. If I had an
image that was that size,
it sounds like I'm not
going to have to think
about how many processors and
therefore how I'm going to
chop this workup. I simply
just kind of unleashed them,
you know, unleash the parallelism
of this, this, this abstraction
layer on that bit of
work. And when it's done,
it's done Exactly. You say
parallel dot for, you know,
X equals zero X is
less than with X plus
plus, and then you have
your inner for loop for
the Y for the height
and whatnot. Now we say
that you don't have to
think about it, but in
reality, you still do because
there are still lots of
problems that developers are gonna
have to think about when
introducing concurrency into their applications.
For example, in the, the
Ray tracer example is a
good one because every pixel
is independent of every other
pixel. And thus, it's what
we refer to as an
embarrassingly parallel application, because you
don't have to think about
what's happening in the body
of the loop. But if,
for example, one of those
pixels depended on one of
the other pixels and thus
there were sort of loop
carried dependencies and enforced, ordering
that needed to happen. We're
now doing these things in
parallel. So you have to
be very, very careful. You
have to manage that shared
state yourself. And the third
portion of the PFX technology
is a set of data
structures and coordination types that
we hope will make that
sort of thing easier, but
it's still something that people
will need to think about.
And there are, there are
other what we're deeming parallelism
blockers that people will need
to be aware of. Obviously
manipulation of shared state and
mutability is one of them,
but there are other things,
for example, let's say you
were writing a windows forms
application you want, wanted to
loop over a huge number
of controls and modify something
on each of the controls,
do some computation to come
up with a new name
for the control or something.
And you decide to go
ahead and parallelize that because
the loop is taking a
few seconds and you'd love
for it to take a
second or less, but in
windows forms and in, in
most of GUI programming on
windows, there's you have this
sta concept single-threaded apartment and
controls. Can't be modified by
threads that didn't create the
control. So as soon as
you say, parallel dot four,
to loop over all these
controls, now background threads are
going to be executing the
body of this loop. They're
going to be modifying these
foreground controls, and you're gonna
start getting exceptions all over.
And that's what I had
to go. And then basically
I found myself in there
before I touch the control,
I have to ask myself
the one thread safe property
and the crawl, is it
cool to be here? Exactly
invoke required. And if it's
not basically, it's like, we'll
come back later and, you
know, come through the back
door, Actually. So there are
certainly cases where this stuff
isn't going to be as
applicable or as appropriate or
additional thought will need to
be added to figure out
what exactly to do. And
there are other scenarios. One
of the big ones we
run into is exception handling.
And, and what does it
mean for a process or
some operation to fail? If
you were, for example, multiplying
every value in an array
by some number and computing
something. And that computation may
possibly throw an exception. And
let's say it may possibly
throw an exception on the
third and the sixth item.
Well, if your process processor
processing this thing, seriously, you
go zero one, two, you
get to three. And it
throws an exception in four,
five, six, seven, et cetera.
They haven't been modified, but
in a concurrent world, if
you had eight processors, for
example, zero through seven might
all be processed at the
same time. And thus you
might actually, even if three
throws an exception and six
throws an exception four and
five may have already been
modified. And similarly now, rather
than just getting this one
exception back now, you're getting
the set of exceptions back,
which may not have been
expected if you're reporting your
code from a, an inherently
sequential world. And then how
do you handle those? I
mean, do you collect them
all up and then make
a decision about whether the
whole thing was a failure
or not? That's our current
point, get into the concept
of a, of a transaction.
Can you roll back those
things? Can you wrap all
this and system not transaction
scope? His actual memory is
a whole nother topic. Okay.
So my second question from
our previous forking about 10
minutes ago was what about
parallelism across machines? There's always
this notion of build farms
and render farms, and it's
a real complex, you know,
the common things. I'm, this
is an ignorant question, but
they call these via Wolf
clusters. There's clusters in general,
they will, clusters are specific
to Linux. Okay. But yeah,
Concept of like, Hey, well,
those boxes aren't doing anything.
I mean, I've got four
or five machines at home
that aren't working too hard.
Yup. Is it conceivable that,
that this kind of concept
could be extended kind of
like outwards? Absolutely. And so
there, there are various teams
at Microsoft working to address
that. One of the biggest
ones is at the moment
is the, the HPC team,
which is doing the compute
cluster server, which allows you
to do exactly that you
have some tasks that you
want split across a whole
bunch of machines, and you
would install basically compute cluster
server. And it is the
equivalent of the Beowulf clusters
you were mentioning, but for
windows Basically. And my last
question about peeling specifically, even
though we've, as we've mentioned
before, appealing is just kind
of a member of a
larger family of parallel technologies
that we're talking about. Is
it, is it truly a
link based thing? I mean,
it is based on the,
the basic ideas that were
put forth when, when link
was introduced. So P link
or parallel link, which is
the current code name for
it is a parallel implementation
of the.net standard query operators.
So link to objects is
basically an implementation of a
bunch of methods on the
innumerable class, numeral select a
numeral dot where a numerable
dot range, whatever P link
introduces parallel innumerable. So yet
parallel new will innumerable.select parallel
numerable dot were parallel, innumerable
dot range, et cetera. And
it implements all those using
kind of all aspects of
parallel implementations under the covers.
When you compile your application
in say C or VB,
and you're using, for example,
the query comprehensions where it
in C sharp, you say
VAR Q equals from P
and people were p.name equals
Steve select P under the
covers. The C-sharp compiler compiles
that down to invocations of
these static methods on the
numerable class because of how
link works and how the
binding works. It searches for
these extension methods and it
finds them. And the only
place that is currently there,
which assistant.link and the system.link
done innumerable class. But if
you say.as parallel, that basically
caused the C sharp compiler
to also find the appealing
methods and to bind to
those tighter than to the
numerable ones. And so if
you were to look at,
in reflector, for example, in.net
reflector, the compiled code, you
would see that rather than
invoking innumerable.select new rule, that
where it was invoking parallel,
numeral about select and where,
and the semantics of these
things are almost identical with
the exception being where we
really can't make them identical
or where we, by default
don't make them identical because
of performance reasons. So for
example, with peeling, currently our
current decision, our current thinking
is that by default, we
won't preserve Ordering, which if
you were to have to
sort the results at the
end, because there's no guarantees
on how things are going
to come back. You. Yeah.
So if you were to
go with the default, that's
true, we allow you to
turn on order preservation, and
it's possible that by the
time we actually ship the
technology, we'll decide that it's
in the best interest of
everyone to enable order preservation
by default, because too many
people would get hung up
on and not being there.
You're talking about. I mean,
you know, you were just
talking, I mean, to be
clear to the listeners, this
is just a typical, and
it's just, it's just kind
of a scoop, no warranty
express or implied in that
particular podcast, which brings me
to my last fork for
question of the evening, which
was you were talking about.
I, you know, I parallel
innumerable, does that mean that
I'm not gonna be able
to get free kind of
parallelism on data structures, like
X elements and things? Are
they going to have to
support parallelism inherently? No, they
will not have to support
parallelism and implicitly. So basically
P link works with anything
that implements I numerable of
T wow. And how's it
going to keep them from
hurting themselves? I mean, I'm
always enumerating through collections and
getting in trouble because someone
got mad halfway through cause
they modified the collection. So
when you're working with an
I and rule of T
if we don't know anything
more specific about it, we
have to internally lock as
we're accessing elements from the
collection, but we try and
do it in an efficient
way, for example, batching our
requests from it. So we
might pull 128 elements from
it and then allow another
thread to come in and
pull 128 elements from it
and so forth. So you
kind of do a, like
a checkout check in process.
That's really creative. Cause when
I first heard that, I
was like, Oh no, I'm
going to have to go
and implement something to make.
This might make my classes
parallel. Now we work with
any data structures that implement
IEnumerable. So that will include
link tech smell. That's fantastic.
And then my last question
was you said that when
you say as parallel at
the end that the C
sharp compiler then binds, I
think you used the word
binds more tightly kind of
puts parallel on top because
we know when we put
in mix ins and we
put in extension methods, it's
about kind of who gets
there first. Did that involve
a change in the C
sharp compiler? No, this is
all playing with how link
was an engineer designed. Exactly.
This is really cool. Wow,
great. Well, yeah, gosh, I'm
a, I have to drink
this and this is pretty
exciting. I really appreciate you
taking the time out of
your day to talk to
her Steven. How's my pleasure.
Thanks for coming. And this
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. We'll see you
again next week. .